README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/specorca.png" alt="SpecOrca logo" width="200">
</p>

# SpecOrca

[![CI](https://github.com/anthropics/spec-orchestrator/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/anthropics/spec-orchestrator/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

A spec-driven, two-role orchestration CLI for software tasks.
An **Architect** decomposes work into precise specifications; an **Agent**
executes each spec using a swappable coding backend (Claude Code by default).

| | |
|---|---|
| **Package** | `spec_orca` |
| **CLI** | `spec-orca` |
| **Python** | >= 3.11 |
| **License** | [MIT](LICENSE) |

## What it does

SpecOrca runs an iterative loop:

1. The **Architect** reads a project state and produces a prioritised list of
   specifications (small, verifiable units of work).
2. The **Agent** picks the next spec, executes it through a coding backend, and
   reports the result.
3. The loop repeats until every spec is resolved or the Architect decides to
   stop.

The coding backend is an interface — the default implementation shells out to
[Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code), but any backend
that satisfies the `Backend` protocol can be substituted.

## Prerequisites

- Python >= 3.11
- (Optional) [Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code)
  installed and on `PATH` if using the default backend.

## Installation

```bash
# From a local clone (editable / development)
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Production install (once published)
pip install spec-orca
```

## Quickstart

```bash
# Verify the install
spec-orca --version

# Show available commands
spec-orca --help

# Create a minimal spec
spec-orca init --goal "Ship a greeting"

# Validate and print ordered specs
spec-orca plan --spec spec.yaml

# Run with the mock backend (no AI, deterministic)
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --backend mock --max-steps 1

# Run with Claude Code (requires claude CLI on PATH)
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --backend claude --max-steps 1 --allow-all

# Check environment health
spec-orca doctor --spec spec.yaml --backend claude
```

## CLI reference

```
$ spec-orca --help
usage: spec-orca [-h] [--version] {run,plan,doctor,init} ...

SpecOrca — a spec-driven two-role orchestrator (Architect / Agent).

options:
  -h, --help  show this help message and exit
  --version   show program's version number and exit

commands:
  run          Run the orchestration loop.
  plan         Validate and print the spec plan.
  doctor       Check environment health.
  init         Scaffold a new spec YAML file.
```

## Spec format

Spec files are YAML documents with the following schema:

| Field | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `goal` | string | High-level objective for the run. |
| `specs` | list | Ordered list of spec objects. |

Each spec object contains:

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `id` | string | yes | Unique identifier for the spec. |
| `title` | string | yes | Short human-readable title. |
| `description` | string | no | Longer explanation of the work. |
| `acceptance_criteria` | list[string] | yes | Conditions that must be met. |
| `dependencies` | list[string] | no | IDs of specs that must complete first. |

Example:

```yaml
goal: "Ship a greeting"
specs:
  - id: "greet"
    title: "Print hello"
    description: "Create a script that prints a greeting."
    acceptance_criteria:
      - "Program prints 'hello'."
    dependencies: []
```

## Backend notes

The default backend is `mock` for deterministic execution. To use Claude Code,
run with `--backend claude` and ensure the `claude` executable is available.
To use a different backend, implement the `Backend` protocol defined in the
package and pass it to the orchestrator at construction time.
Backend documentation will expand as the interface stabilises.

## Claude Code backend

Prerequisites:
- Install [Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code).
- Ensure the CLI is on `PATH` and responding to `claude -v`.

Verify the environment:
```bash
claude -v
spec-orca doctor --backend claude --spec spec.yaml
```

Minimal run:
```bash
spec-orca run --backend claude --spec spec.yaml --max-steps 1 --allow-all
```

Tool permissions:

Claude Code runs in non-interactive (`-p`) mode, which denies all tool use
by default. You **must** grant permissions or the agent will not be able to
read, write, or execute anything.

The quickest way to get started is `--allow-all`, which grants access to
every standard Claude Code tool (Bash, Read, Write, Edit, Glob, Grep,
WebFetch, WebSearch, NotebookEdit):

```bash
spec-orca run --backend claude --spec spec.yaml --max-steps 3 --allow-all
```

For tighter control, pass an explicit allowlist instead:

```bash
spec-orca run --backend claude --spec spec.yaml \
  --claude-allowed-tools "Read(*)" \
  --claude-allowed-tools "Write(*)" \
  --claude-allowed-tools "Edit(*)" \
  --claude-disallowed-tools "Bash(*)"
```

You can also block specific tools with `--claude-disallowed-tools` or
restrict to an exact set with `--claude-tools`.

Claude configuration precedence (highest to lowest):
1) CLI flags
2) Config file (`spec-orca.toml` or `[tool.spec_orca]` in `pyproject.toml`)
3) Environment variables (`CLAUDE_CODE_*`)
4) Defaults

Config example:
```toml
[tool.spec_orca]
claude_bin = "claude"
claude_allowed_tools = ["read:*", "write:*"]
claude_disallowed_tools = ["rm:*"]
claude_tools = ["edit", "read"]
claude_max_turns = 4
claude_max_budget_usd = 2.5
claude_timeout_seconds = 300
claude_no_session_persistence = true
```

## Codex backend

Prerequisites:
- Install the OpenAI codex CLI.
- Ensure `codex` is on `PATH`.

Verify setup:
```bash
spec-orca doctor --backend codex
```

Minimal run:
```bash
spec-orca run --backend codex --spec spec.yaml --max-steps 1
```

Optional model selection:
```bash
spec-orca run --backend codex --spec spec.yaml --codex-model gpt-5-codex
```

## Development

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for full details.

```bash
# Install with dev dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run all checks (format, lint, typecheck, tests)
nox

# Run individual sessions
nox -s fmt             # auto-format
nox -s lint            # ruff lint
nox -s typecheck       # mypy strict
nox -s tests           # pytest + coverage

# Install pre-commit hooks
pre-commit install
```

### Auto-commit (opt-in)

When iterating on this repository you can let SpecOrca commit
changes automatically after each successful run:

```bash
# Commit with an auto-generated message
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --auto-commit

# Add a Conventional Commit prefix
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --auto-commit --commit-prefix feat

# Multi-step run with auto-commit
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --max-steps 3 --auto-commit --commit-prefix chore
```

Behaviour:
- **Off by default** - auto-commit only runs when `--auto-commit` is passed.
- Only **tracked files** are staged (`git add -u`).
- **No commit on a clean tree** - if nothing changed, the commit is skipped.
- **No commit on failed runs** - runs that exit non-zero never auto-commit.
- Commit messages are single-line, normalized, and include the prefix when
  provided (e.g. `feat: spec-orca run: Add widgets`).
- The git helper lives in `spec_orca/dev/git.py` and does not affect
  the core orchestration logic.

## Project layout

```
src/spec_orca/           # installable package
tests/                   # pytest test suite
noxfile.py               # dev task runner
pyproject.toml           # PEP 621 metadata + tool config
```

## Documentation

- [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) — system design and module map
- [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) — release history (Keep a Changelog)
- [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) — how to contribute
- [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) — community standards
- [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) — vulnerability reporting

Commit message:

fix: wire codex backend with exec mode

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/specorca.png" alt="SpecOrca logo" width="200">
</p>

# SpecOrca

[![CI](https://github.com/anthropics/spec-orchestrator/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/anthropics/spec-orchestrator/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

A spec-driven, two-role orchestration CLI for software tasks.
An **Architect** decomposes work into precise specifications; an **Agent**
executes each spec using a swappable coding backend (mock by default).

| | |
|---|---|
| **Package** | `spec_orca` |
| **CLI** | `spec-orca` |
| **Python** | >= 3.11 |
| **License** | [MIT](LICENSE) |

## What it does

SpecOrca runs an iterative loop:

1. The **Architect** reads a project state and produces a prioritised list of
   specifications (small, verifiable units of work).
2. The **Agent** picks the next spec, executes it through a coding backend, and
   reports the result.
3. The loop repeats until every spec is resolved or the Architect decides to
   stop.

The coding backend is an interface. SpecOrca ships with deterministic `mock`,
[Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code), and OpenAI
Codex backends, but any backend that satisfies the `Backend` protocol can be
substituted.

## Prerequisites

- Python >= 3.11
- (Optional) [Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code)
  installed and on `PATH` if using the default backend.

## Installation

```bash
# From a local clone (editable / development)
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Production install (once published)
pip install spec-orca
```

## Quickstart

```bash
# Verify the install
spec-orca --version

# Show available commands
spec-orca --help

# Create a minimal spec
spec-orca init --goal "Ship a greeting"

# Validate and print ordered specs
spec-orca plan --spec spec.yaml

# Run with the mock backend (no AI, deterministic)
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --backend mock --max-steps 1

# Run with Claude Code (requires claude CLI on PATH)
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --backend claude --max-steps 1 --allow-all

# Check environment health
spec-orca doctor --spec spec.yaml --backend claude
```

## CLI reference

```
$ spec-orca --help
usage: spec-orca [-h] [--version] {run,plan,doctor,init} ...

SpecOrca — a spec-driven two-role orchestrator (Architect / Agent).

options:
  -h, --help  show this help message and exit
  --version   show program's version number and exit

commands:
  run          Run the orchestration loop.
  plan         Validate and print the spec plan.
  doctor       Check environment health.
  init         Scaffold a new spec YAML file.
```

## Spec format

Spec files are YAML documents with the following schema:

| Field | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `goal` | string | High-level objective for the run. |
| `specs` | list | Ordered list of spec objects. |

Each spec object contains:

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `id` | string | yes | Unique identifier for the spec. |
| `title` | string | yes | Short human-readable title. |
| `description` | string | no | Longer explanation of the work. |
| `acceptance_criteria` | list[string] | yes | Conditions that must be met. |
| `dependencies` | list[string] | no | IDs of specs that must complete first. |

Example:

```yaml
goal: "Ship a greeting"
specs:
  - id: "greet"
    title: "Print hello"
    description: "Create a script that prints a greeting."
    acceptance_criteria:
      - "Program prints 'hello'."
    dependencies: []
```

## Backend notes

The default backend is `mock` for deterministic execution. To use Claude Code,
run with `--backend claude` and ensure the `claude` executable is available.
To use a different backend, implement the `Backend` protocol defined in the
package and pass it to the orchestrator at construction time.
Backend documentation will expand as the interface stabilises.

## Claude Code backend

Prerequisites:
- Install [Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code).
- Ensure the CLI is on `PATH` and responding to `claude -v`.

Verify the environment:
```bash
claude -v
spec-orca doctor --backend claude --spec spec.yaml
```

Minimal run:
```bash
spec-orca run --backend claude --spec spec.yaml --max-steps 1 --allow-all
```

Tool permissions:

Claude Code runs in non-interactive (`-p`) mode, which denies all tool use
by default. You **must** grant permissions or the agent will not be able to
read, write, or execute anything.

The quickest way to get started is `--allow-all`, which grants access to
every standard Claude Code tool (Bash, Read, Write, Edit, Glob, Grep,
WebFetch, WebSearch, NotebookEdit):

```bash
spec-orca run --backend claude --spec spec.yaml --max-steps 3 --allow-all
```

For tighter control, pass an explicit allowlist instead:

```bash
spec-orca run --backend claude --spec spec.yaml \
  --claude-allowed-tools "Read(*)" \
  --claude-allowed-tools "Write(*)" \
  --claude-allowed-tools "Edit(*)" \
  --claude-disallowed-tools "Bash(*)"
```

You can also block specific tools with `--claude-disallowed-tools` or
restrict to an exact set with `--claude-tools`.

Claude configuration precedence (highest to lowest):
1) CLI flags
2) Config file (`spec-orca.toml` or `[tool.spec_orca]` in `pyproject.toml`)
3) Environment variables (`CLAUDE_CODE_*`)
4) Defaults

Config example:
```toml
[tool.spec_orca]
claude_bin = "claude"
claude_allowed_tools = ["read:*", "write:*"]
claude_disallowed_tools = ["rm:*"]
claude_tools = ["edit", "read"]
claude_max_turns = 4
claude_max_budget_usd = 2.5
claude_timeout_seconds = 300
claude_no_session_persistence = true
```

## Codex backend

Prerequisites:
- Install the OpenAI Codex CLI and ensure `codex` is on `PATH`.
- Verify the binary and doctor checks:

```bash
codex --version
spec-orca doctor --backend codex --spec spec.yaml
```

Minimal run:
```bash
spec-orca run --backend codex --spec spec.yaml --max-steps 1
```

Model and timeout options:
```bash
spec-orca run --backend codex --spec spec.yaml \
  --codex-model gpt-5-codex \
  --codex-timeout-seconds 1800
```

Execution notes:
- SpecOrca invokes Codex as `codex exec --full-auto --json "<prompt>"`.
- `--full-auto` enables unattended tool execution. Use it only in trusted repos.
- Codex configuration precedence (highest to lowest):
  1) CLI flags (`--codex-bin`, `--codex-model`, `--codex-timeout-seconds`)
  2) Config file (`spec-orca.toml` or `[tool.spec_orca]` in `pyproject.toml`)
  3) Environment variables (`CODEX_EXECUTABLE`, `CODEX_MODEL`, `CODEX_TIMEOUT`)
  4) Defaults

## Development

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for full details.

```bash
# Install with dev dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run all checks (format, lint, typecheck, tests)
nox

# Run individual sessions
nox -s fmt             # auto-format
nox -s lint            # ruff lint
nox -s typecheck       # mypy strict
nox -s tests           # pytest + coverage

# Install pre-commit hooks
pre-commit install
```

### Auto-commit (opt-in)

When iterating on this repository you can let SpecOrca commit
changes automatically after each successful run:

```bash
# Commit with an auto-generated message
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --auto-commit

# Add a Conventional Commit prefix
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --auto-commit --commit-prefix feat

# Multi-step run with auto-commit
spec-orca run --spec spec.yaml --max-steps 3 --auto-commit --commit-prefix chore
```

Behaviour:
- **Off by default** - auto-commit only runs when `--auto-commit` is passed.
- Only **tracked files** are staged (`git add -u`).
- **No commit on a clean tree** - if nothing changed, the commit is skipped.
- **No commit on failed runs** - runs that exit non-zero never auto-commit.
- Commit messages are single-line, normalized, and include the prefix when
  provided (e.g. `feat: spec-orca run: Add widgets`).
- The git helper lives in `spec_orca/dev/git.py` and does not affect
  the core orchestration logic.

## Project layout

```
src/spec_orca/           # installable package
tests/                   # pytest test suite
noxfile.py               # dev task runner
pyproject.toml           # PEP 621 metadata + tool config
```

## Documentation

- [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) — system design and module map
- [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) — release history (Keep a Changelog)
- [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) — how to contribute
- [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) — community standards
- [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) — vulnerability reporting
